Medical image segmentation often bottlenecks researchers who work with large image-datasets. The process of image segmentation is currently a manual process, with researchers at Monash University spending between 40 to 60 hours manually segmenting small animal 4DCT lung scans in a typical experiment. This project investigated the efficacy of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN’s) in automatically segmenting medical images of lungs, with the fundamental aim of reducing human interaction time during this process.

Building upon existing literature on CNN’s, this project designed and developed a high-performance U-Net architecture for segmenting these lung scans using the open-source Keras and TensorFlow frameworks in Python. To validate the developed model, the effect of image noise on performance was investigated by adding Poisson noise to the lung scans to model differing image capture equipment characteristics. Additionally, the effect of the number of training scans provided on model performance was measured by changing the number of scans linearly from 1 to 10. This was conducted in order to make sure that large amounts of manually segmented scans were not required to create a high-performance model.

The final model architecture had strong performance characteristics with a Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) of 97% and Intersection Over Union (IoU) score of 94%, which is comparable to equivalent architectures developed in literature. The network was able to reduce the segmentation time for each scan from 15 minutes of manual interaction to 11 seconds of automatic segmentation. The final model was also able to segment noisy lung scans effectively, with a DSC score of 20% and IoU score of 11% whilst still identifying the boundaries of lung tissue accurately. Finally the model only required 5 manually segmented scans before the model converged on >90% DSC and IoU scores during testing. 

The results show that CNN’s are an effective method for automatically segmenting medical images, both with high accuracy and low time-cost. The U-Net architecture is robust to noise in images and a developed architecture can be used across different image sets captured with varying equipment characteristics. An appropriately designed U-Net with sufficient depth and complexity is able to compensate for scarcity in training data, preventing the need for large amounts of manual segmentation to train the model. As a result of these findings, it is hoped that CNN’s are shown to be an effective tool for medical image research.

